Pages: 6

===== PAGE 1 =====

Page 1
■ eCommerce Security Checklist
  ■  SECURITY GUIDE  
 eCommerce Website
 Security Checklist
 Everything you need to build a secure app — with explanations for each step.
6
Sections
30+
Checklist Items
100%
Free to Use
■
You can build a working eCommerce website in 5 minutes. But if you skip security, hackers will exploit it just as fast. Use this
checklist on EVERY project you ship.
1
■■  Frontend Security
■
Never Store API Keys on the Frontend
API keys placed in your frontend code or .env files with REACT_APP_ / VITE_ prefixes get bundled into the
browser build — anyone can read them with DevTools. Always route sensitive API calls through your backend
server.
■
Store JWT Tokens in HttpOnly Cookies — Not localStorage
localStorage is accessible by any JavaScript on the page, making it easy to steal via XSS. HttpOnly Cookies are
invisible to JavaScript entirely — the browser sends them automatically but JS cannot read them, blocking most
token theft attacks.
■■
Add a Content Security Policy (CSP) Header
CSP tells the browser which scripts, styles, and sources are trusted. It blocks injected scripts from running even if
an attacker manages to inject malicious code into your page. Add it as an HTTP header: Content-Security-Policy:
default-src 'self'; script-src 'self'
■
Sanitize All User Input with DOMPurify
Never insert raw user-provided HTML into the DOM. An attacker can inject <script> tags that execute in your user's
browser (XSS). Use DOMPurify: const clean = DOMPurify.sanitize(userInput) before rendering anything. Client-side
validation alone is never enough — always validate on the backend too.
■
Add Subresource Integrity (SRI) to CDN Scripts
When you load a library from a CDN, you're trusting that CDN forever. If the CDN is compromised, malicious code
runs on your site. SRI adds a hash check: <script integrity='sha384-...' crossorigin='anonymous'> — the browser
rejects the file if it doesn't match the expected hash.


===== PAGE 2 =====

Page 2
■ eCommerce Security Checklist
■
Force HTTPS — Never Allow Plain HTTP
HTTP traffic is unencrypted — anyone on the same network can read it (man-in-the-middle). In production, always
redirect all HTTP requests to HTTPS. Most hosting platforms (Vercel, Netlify, Cloudflare) do this automatically.
2
■■  Backend Security
■
Authorization Must Always Happen on the Backend
Checking userRole === 'admin' on the frontend is cosmetic only. Anyone can open Chrome DevTools, change that
variable, and bypass your UI checks instantly. Every protected action must be verified server-side on every single
request.
■
Use Parameterized Queries to Prevent SQL Injection
SQL injection is one of the most common attacks. If you build queries like "SELECT * FROM users WHERE id = " +
userId, an attacker can inject SQL commands to dump your entire database. Use parameterized queries or an
ORM like Prisma or Sequelize — they handle escaping automatically.
■■
Set Rate Limiting on All Endpoints
Without rate limiting, attackers can make thousands of requests per second — brute-forcing passwords,
overwhelming your server, or scraping your data. Use express-rate-limit (Node.js) to cap requests per IP. Apply
stricter limits to login, register, and password reset endpoints.
■
Configure CORS — Never Use Wildcard (*) in Production
CORS controls which domains can call your API. Setting Access-Control-Allow-Origin: * allows ANY website to
make requests to your backend. In production, explicitly list only your trusted frontend domains. Wildcard is fine for
fully public APIs only.
■
Use Helmet.js to Set Security Headers Automatically
Helmet.js is a Node.js middleware that sets 14+ HTTP security headers in one line: app.use(helmet()). It configures
X-Frame-Options (prevents clickjacking), X-Content-Type-Options (prevents MIME sniffing),
Strict-Transport-Security, and more — hardening your app against a wide range of common attacks.
■
Add CSRF Protection to All Forms
Cross-Site Request Forgery tricks a logged-in user's browser into submitting a request to your server without their
knowledge (e.g. transferring money). CSRF tokens are unique per-session values included in forms — your server
rejects any request that doesn't include the correct token. Use csurf (Node.js).
■■
Return Generic Error Messages Only
Error messages like 'User not found' or stack traces tell attackers exactly which usernames exist and how your
code is structured. Always return generic messages: 'Something went wrong'. Log the real error server-side with
Sentry or similar — never expose it to the client.
■
Validate File Uploads — Type, Size & Content
Accepting file uploads without validation is extremely dangerous. Attackers can upload PHP/JS files disguised as
images, or massive files to crash your server. Always validate MIME type, file extension, and file size. In
production, consider virus scanning uploads with ClamAV or a cloud service.


===== PAGE 3 =====

Page 3
■ eCommerce Security Checklist
■
Scan Dependencies for Vulnerabilities Regularly
Your app's security is only as strong as its weakest dependency. Third-party packages can contain known
vulnerabilities. Run npm audit weekly, or use Snyk for continuous automated monitoring. Keep packages updated
and remove unused dependencies.
3
■  Authentication
■
Use a Battle-Tested Auth Library — Don't Build From Scratch
JWT authentication has many subtle vulnerabilities: algorithm confusion, weak secret keys, missing expiry
validation, and more. Libraries like Supabase Auth, NextAuth.js, and Auth0 are audited by security experts and
handle all edge cases. Building your own is rarely worth the risk.
■
Use a Two-Token JWT System (Access + Refresh)
A single long-lived JWT is dangerous — if stolen, it works forever. Use two tokens: an Access Token (short expiry,
e.g. 15 mins) for API calls, and a Refresh Token (long expiry, stored in HttpOnly cookie) to issue new access
tokens. If the access token is stolen, it expires quickly.
■
Hash All Passwords with bcrypt — Never Store Plain Text
If your database is breached and passwords are stored in plain text or with weak hashing (MD5, SHA1), every user
account is instantly compromised. bcrypt uses a salt and computational cost to make cracking infeasible. Use:
const hash = await bcrypt.hash(password, 12)
■
Implement Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)
Even if a password is leaked, MFA requires a second proof of identity (TOTP app like Google Authenticator, SMS
code, or hardware key). Offer MFA to all users and make it mandatory for admin accounts. Libraries: speakeasy
(TOTP), or use Supabase/Auth0 built-in MFA.
■
Apply Strict Rate Limiting on Login Endpoints
Without login rate limiting, attackers can try millions of password combinations (brute force) or try leaked passwords
from other breaches (credential stuffing). After 5 failed attempts from one IP, add exponential delay or temporarily
lock. Log and alert on unusual login patterns.
■
Implement RBAC — Role-Based Access Control
Not all users should access all resources. RBAC assigns roles (User, Admin, Seller) and each role has specific
permissions. Enforce role checks in backend middleware for EVERY protected endpoint. Never rely on the frontend
to hide admin features — the API endpoint itself must reject unauthorized roles.
4
■  eCommerce-Specific Security
■
Never Store Raw Payment Data — Use Stripe / Razorpay
Storing card numbers, CVV codes, or banking details yourself requires PCI DSS Level 1 compliance — an
extremely costly and complex certification. Payment processors like Stripe and Razorpay handle all of this for you.
They tokenize card data so your server never sees the raw numbers.


===== PAGE 4 =====

Page 4
■ eCommerce Security Checklist
■■
PCI DSS violation fines range from $5,000 to $100,000 per month. A single breach exposing card data can end your business.
Always delegate payment processing to a trusted gateway.
■
Validate Prices on the Backend — Not the Frontend
If you calculate the order total on the frontend and send it to the backend, an attacker can intercept that request
and change the price to $0.01. Your backend must ALWAYS fetch the current price from the database and
recalculate the total server-side before processing any payment.
■
Validate Stock and Orders with Database Transactions
Race conditions can allow two users to buy the last item simultaneously. Use database transactions with row-level
locking when updating inventory. Always verify stock availability at the moment of purchase, not just when the user
adds to cart. Return a clear error if stock runs out between steps.
5
■  Secrets Management
■
Store All Secrets in .env Files — Never Hardcode
Hardcoding API keys, database URLs, or passwords directly in source code is a critical mistake. When that code is
committed to Git, those secrets are exposed forever (even if deleted later — Git history is permanent). Store all
secrets in .env files and access them via process.env.
■
Add ALL .env Files to .gitignore — Non-Negotiable
Add these to your .gitignore immediately: .env / .env.local / .env.production / .env.development / .env.staging — If
ANY of these are committed to a public repo, rotate all secrets immediately. Bots scan GitHub 24/7 for exposed
credentials and exploit them within minutes.
■
Real incident: developers accidentally push .env files to public GitHub repos every day. Automated bots find and abuse these
credentials within 2-3 minutes of the push.
■
Scan Every Commit for Leaked Secrets Before Pushing
Even with .gitignore, it's easy to accidentally commit a secret. Use git-secrets or TruffleHog to scan every commit
automatically before it's pushed. Set up a pre-commit hook so it runs every time: git-secrets --scan on every
commit. If a key leaks, rotate it immediately.
6
■■  Infrastructure & Monitoring
■
Set Up Error Monitoring with Sentry
You need to know when things break in production — before your users complain. Sentry captures frontend and
backend errors with full stack traces, user context, and request data. It takes 10 minutes to set up and is free for
small projects. Also consider PostHog for product analytics and user behavior tracking.


===== PAGE 5 =====

Page 5
■ eCommerce Security Checklist
■
Use a Web Application Firewall (WAF) — Cloudflare Free Tier
A WAF sits in front of your server and filters malicious traffic before it reaches you. Cloudflare's free tier includes
DDoS protection, bot filtering, rate limiting, and a basic WAF. It also acts as a CDN for faster load times globally.
Setup takes under 15 minutes — point your DNS to Cloudflare.
■
Set Up Automated Daily Database Backups
Data loss from ransomware, accidental deletion, or provider outages can kill a business. Configure automated daily
backups with at least 30-day retention. Critically: test your restore process regularly. A backup you've never
restored is an untested backup. Enable point-in-time recovery for databases that support it.


===== PAGE 6 =====

Page 6
■ eCommerce Security Checklist
 ■ Quick Recap — Your Security Cheat Sheet
 Bookmark this page. Reference it on every project.
■■ Frontend
→ API Keys → Backend only — never in browser code
→ JWT → HttpOnly Cookies, never localStorage
→ CSP Headers + DOMPurify for XSS protection
→ SRI hashes on CDN scripts
→ Force HTTPS in production
■■ Backend
→ Authorization always enforced server-side
→ Parameterized queries or ORM (Prisma/Sequelize)
→ Rate limiting on all endpoints
→ CORS — no wildcards in production
→ Helmet.js + CSRF tokens + generic errors
■ Auth
→ Use Supabase / NextAuth — don't build from scratch
→ Access Token (15 min) + Refresh Token (HttpOnly)
→ bcrypt for password hashing (cost: 12)
→ MFA for all users, mandatory for admins
→ RBAC on every protected endpoint
■ eCommerce
→ Payments via Stripe/Razorpay — never store card data
→ Price validation ALWAYS on the backend
→ DB transactions for inventory to prevent race conditions
■ Secrets
→ All secrets in .env — never hardcoded
→ Every .env variant in .gitignore
→ Scan commits with git-secrets before pushing
■■ Infra
→ Sentry for error monitoring
→ Cloudflare free tier for WAF + DDoS protection
→ Automated daily DB backups + test restores
■  Follow this checklist and your app will be secure.
■  Build Fast. Build Secure.
